The objective of treatment is continuous pressure on cancer cells over an extended period of time all the while ensuring that the normal body function is still intact. 

There are things that can be done before treatment like running tests to ensure all vital organs are behaving normally and preparing critical ones for the oncoming onslaught of chemotherapy drugs. For example you need to ensure kidney and liver are functioning properly before administering Methotrexate if you don't want drug toxicity levels to reach fatal levels; also you will alkalinize the urine 24 hours in advance so that the local environment is prepared for acidic drugs and its metabolite. These preparations constrain the set of problems we may encounter once the procedure actually starts. For example, there are higher chances of Mtx crystallizing in renal tubules if the local environment is acidic.

From theory and guidelines, you know how the drug is supposed to behave, what organs it will directly hamper and what additional drugs you use to rescue from a downward spiral. The first order effects are predictable, the higher order ones are very difficult to know and prepare for in advance. You just have to end up using an exit strategy like flushing out everything before patient enters shock.

Therefore it's essential to get a read on the current state of the system to meet the objective. Plasma methotrexate levels show how much drug is in the body and its change over time shows how well it's being cleared. It is useful especially for downstream effects i.e. maintaining pressure on cancer cells. What do you call "pressure" ? Keeping neutrophils and healthy cells in an admissible range and avoid catastrophic co-morbidities, toxicity effects while continuing long spanning does of chemo. So you need readings of these useful molecules and also a reading of drug exposure. The first one you read to ensure it's in a narrow band and the second one you read to ensure it's not spiraling out of control. High drug exposure is the cause of neutropenia, AKI, bone marrow toxicity. So you measure the cause early instead of the effect which is delayed. There are empirical evidence which suggest permissible values for drug exposure.

What if you read something else like urine pH and volume over time ? There are several problems to this statement:
1. For a perfectly well functioning kidney you can probably make the case that if the urine pH starts to become acidic beyond an agreed upon threshold, you have reached toxicity levels. But the toxicity level here applies specifically to kidney only. Any further drug exposure will impair renal function and cause Acute Kidney Infection. So urine pH is a measure of kidney drug toxicity more than systemic drug toxicity. How else would acidity of urine which is an output of kidney function be tied to effect of drug on the functioning of any other organ say epithelial lining ?
2. urine pH readings are measurement of local toxicity. They do not help plan out emergent properties like systemic drug exposure and healthy cell status because we can not directly backtrace systemic exposure and toxicity from these readings.
3. urine pH is an aggregate measure of the entire kidney and doesn't reflect any injury already sustained in some corner of the overal organ. This is important because infection makes more infection much more likely as drug isn't removed and has more chances of affecting kidney cells and tubules. This makes the state of kidney function more opaque and relying on it dangerous for the entire treatment.
4. Because kidney's function is complex and hard to read, one can similarly make complex statements about why urine pH is a good enough metric to rely on. This statement however also builds on the fact that its functioning is complex and by this common understanding, we should rely on something that directly represents the thing we want to measure instead of indirectly and convolutedly.

To get timely clear and direct readings of the state of system, we should rely on drug levels in blood.